---
layout: research
area: "data assimilation"
permalink: /research/data-assimilation/
---
Data assimilation is a mathematical discipline that seeks to optimally combine theory (usually in the form of a numerical model) with observations. There may be a number of different goals sought – for example, to determine the optimal state estimate of a system, to determine initial conditions for a numerical forecast model, to interpolate sparse observation data using (e.g. physical) knowledge of the system being observed, to set numerical parameters based on training a model from observed data. Depending on the goal, different solution methods may be used. Data assimilation is distinguished from other forms of machine learning, image analysis, and statistical methods in that it utilizes a dynamical model of the system being analyzed. <br>

More recently, we have extended our SD work to examining the role of sleep/circadian rhythm patterns in naturalistic settings on cognition. An examination of the association between chronic sleep restriction and electrocortical arousal in college students ([Witkowski, S., Trujillo, L. T., Sherman, S. M., Carter, P., Matthews, M. D., & Schnyer, D. M. (2014)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25043966)) and mood regulation ([Vanderlind, M.W., Beevers, C.G., Sherman, S.M., Trujillo, L.T., McGeary, J.E., Matthews, M.D., Maddox, W.T. & Schnyer, D.M. (2013). Sleep and Sadness: Exploring the Relation among the CLOCK Gene, Sleep, Cognitive Control, and Change in Depression Symptoms. Sleep Medicine. 15 (1), 144-149](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24332565)) in both young and older adults. These studies combine field-based actigraphy recordings over extended periods of time with behavioral and functional imaging measures, as well as sleep/circadian rhythm-associated genetics. The field based recordings have led us to collaborate with individuals in the biomedical engineering and computer science departments here at UT to develop mobile monitoring and intervention applications that utilize real-time sensor data to assess an individual’s cognitive and mood states and push interventions to them through mobile social media platforms.
